So.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So welcome to this, uh, last but final session of
Ila.
NOTE CONF
Um, as advised on the announcement, I will be doing
a sort of high level revision session today.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then tomorrow there's two tutors that will give
a much more sort of practical examples.
NOTE CONF
Type class.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I hope you're getting something from that.
Uh, so my, um, what I'm doing today is, is
NOTE CONF
a quite different style to what I've done so far.
So there's not new material.
NOTE CONF
I won't be having any club polls, but rather I
try to sort of organise a bit of all the
NOTE CONF
stuff that we've done into sort of what, what are
the really important things?
NOTE CONF
How do they fit together?
What are the things we expect you to be able
NOTE CONF
to do for the synoptic assessment, or people that later
expect you to be able to know this of all
NOTE CONF
the stuff that we've done.
And I'm also trying to show you a little bit
NOTE CONF
of where these things are used for outside of Ila.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So you probably had a little bit of that, but
this is a sort of overview.
NOTE CONF
And to some extent the slides that I've got here
will be uploaded and they should be sort of reference
NOTE CONF
material for you to be able to look through and
say, oh yeah, these are the things I ought to
NOTE CONF
know.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Without further ado.
NOTE CONF
So this is the stuff that we've done here.
I've just copied all the chapter titles from Nicholson there.
NOTE CONF
That doesn't necessarily necessarily tell you very much.
So rather organise this into a sort of few skills
NOTE CONF
or things that we've done.
So we've done we solve systems of linear equations.
NOTE CONF
That was the first major bit.
I talked a bit about matrix algebra algebra.
NOTE CONF
And we had inverses of matrices.
We had determinants.
NOTE CONF
How to calculate them.
We talked about transformations the relation between linear transformations and
NOTE CONF
matrices.
How to find the matrix for a given transformation.
NOTE CONF
Um we've done, done quite a bit of, um, um,
vector geometry, starting with dot products and cross products and
NOTE CONF
how to use these to describe lines and planes in
R2 and R3.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then also sort of a bit more abstract
bit of talking about a basis of subspaces.
NOTE CONF
We have concepts that have no row column eigenspaces.
Um, and we talked about orthogonal basis um and eigenvalues
NOTE CONF
and eigenvectors.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh yeah.
NOTE CONF
And then finally diagonalising a matrix.
So these are the sort of stuff that we've concentrated
NOTE CONF
on, the stuff that we taught you.
Um, and just as a highlight and I want to
NOTE CONF
go a little bit more into sort of most of
these and tell you a few more things about that,
NOTE CONF
what that means in practice.
So let's start with Gaussian elimination.
NOTE CONF
Um, the the first thing to say there is really
that Gaussian elimination.
NOTE CONF
If there's one thing that you remember from this course.
One skill you can do then this would be Gaussian
NOTE CONF
elimination.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This is one of the most important algorithms, not just
in what we taught, but full stop anywhere really.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it's sort of, um, drive home that point.
So if I look here is an article from Nick
NOTE CONF
Higham, um, one of the most, uh, sort of respected
applied mathematicians in Britain.
NOTE CONF
Unfortunately, he died at the start of this year.
Um, actually, his brother death as a teacher, as a
NOTE CONF
professor in the school of math here.
Um, but he's he's a really known person.
NOTE CONF
He had a sort of top ten algorithms in applied
mathematics.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if you go further down here, um, there's
the list of algorithms, and we should make this a
NOTE CONF
little bit larger, um, in order actually.
And in number two, you have matrix factorisation you into,
NOTE CONF
let's say a little bit about where it's coming from.
It's basically Gaussian elimination.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So this is this is really an algorithm that is
NOTE CONF
used any everywhere.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Go back to that.
NOTE CONF
Carry on.
So, um, what have we sort of within our LA.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we've used this obviously to solve linear systems of
equations, but then quite a few other things where Gauss
NOTE CONF
elimination came up finding inverses of matrices, calculating determinant.
Um, quite a bit of stuff to do with lines
NOTE CONF
and planes, vector geometry, um, testing whether some vector is
a linear combination of other, whether they're linear independent.
NOTE CONF
All of this has been done by Gaussian elimination.
And also, uh, finding bases of various spaces and then
NOTE CONF
finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
So it's popped up in Ila pretty much in every
NOTE CONF
topic.
Um, and outside of Isla, as I said, um, everywhere.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's just keep coming sometime in its variants of Lu
NOTE CONF
decomposition or Cholesky decomposition is what Nick Higham here said.
Both of those I think are covered in Nicholson.
NOTE CONF
We just didn't go through them, you know.
But you will you will likely see these again.
NOTE CONF
Under these guises.
But there's really not much going on other than what
NOTE CONF
we already had.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I think I want to actually get away from the
NOTE CONF
laptop here and have both screens.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I sort of each of these topics, I
divide into sort of, um, skills, like things that, you
NOTE CONF
know, should know how to do.
And I also have something on theory that is applicable
NOTE CONF
that you should be aware of, you know, so Gauss
elimination, the skills are you should be able to perform
NOTE CONF
row operation to guess to row echelon form or reduced
row echelon form.
NOTE CONF
Obviously, um, find elementary matrices corresponding to the row operation
and use these all to determine solutions to system of
NOTE CONF
equations, But also we know that there's not always just
one solution.
NOTE CONF
There can be zero and infinitely many.
So you should be able to distinguish these cases and
NOTE CONF
if necessary, or if applicable, write down a basis of
the solution space.
NOTE CONF
Now substituting in parameters.
Doing that um and know how to apply this to.
NOTE CONF
For example, find the inverse of the matrix.
Find an eigenspace for an eigenvector.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Determine the basis of knowledge space, common space, or so
NOTE CONF
on.
Um.
NOTE CONF
There's more.
When I get to that, um, that I'll tell you
NOTE CONF
where where these things are.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Theory, um, applicable to Gaussian elimination.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the effect of row operations.
No, they don't change the solution space.
NOTE CONF
They don't change the null space, they don't change the
row space.
NOTE CONF
Um, they may change the determinant depending on what you're
doing.
NOTE CONF
Uh, type three I think, or, um, just adding one
column to run row to the other doesn't, but more
NOTE CONF
deploying or swapping rows has an effect, so be careful
with that.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's an equivalent with elementary matrices, and we can
determine the rank here by leading ones in row echelon
NOTE CONF
form.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And just as a note, we didn't say much or
NOTE CONF
that we've done this or for row operations, pretty much
the sort of same or similar theory can be developed
NOTE CONF
regarding column operations.
But we haven't really done this here just as a
NOTE CONF
sort of awareness.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So after, um, Gaussian elimination, the next thing we did
was matrix algebra.
NOTE CONF
So how to work how to calculate with matrices and
vectors.
NOTE CONF
Um, so things you should know how to do obviously
is the rules here.
NOTE CONF
So how do I multiply a matrix with a vector.
How do I multiply matrix with a matrix.
NOTE CONF
How do I do a dot product or scalar product.
How do I do a cross product.
NOTE CONF
Um, I should you should be able to find the
inverse of the matrix and determine when a matrix has
NOTE CONF
an inverse.
Again Gaussian elimination.
NOTE CONF
We've just done that.
Um, the theory that we have is while the usual
NOTE CONF
rules of calculating with matrices.
So we had associativity there.
NOTE CONF
We had the distributive law.
Um, those work as you'd expect.
NOTE CONF
We had things that do not work like matrices.
Matrix multiplication isn't isn't symmetric.
NOTE CONF
The order matters.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we had stuff that um, so c a equals
c b for just highlight that there, does that follow
NOTE CONF
that a equals b.
And you remember.
NOTE CONF
You can tell me whether that's true or not true
up there.
NOTE CONF
It is true when C is invertible.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So if C is invertible you can multiply both sides
from the left with c inverse.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise this might not be the case.
Be aware of things like that.
NOTE CONF
Um, also, if you do something like multiplying matrices together,
the dimensions much must match.
NOTE CONF
You can't do all matrix matrix product or matrix vector
products and to some extent in this aspect calculating with
NOTE CONF
them vectors are really just a special case of matrices.
Right okay.
NOTE CONF
We have these only of course invertible.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we talked about inverses of matrices.
So we had quite a few sort of matrix inversion
NOTE CONF
theorem um telling you properties about matrices that are equivalent
to a matrix being invertible.
NOTE CONF
I put this sort of in the sort of order
of importance rather than the order in which we've done
NOTE CONF
that.
Um, so the most important is probably determinant not being
NOTE CONF
equal to zero.
Um, but there's quite a few others.
NOTE CONF
So that is equivalent with a rank on the matrix
being a full rank.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's a couple of properties regarding systems of equations.
So for example, homogeneous system only has the trivial solution.
NOTE CONF
Homogeneous system is a system where the right hand side
is zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Or indeed.
NOTE CONF
This.
Here is a special case of the one below.
NOTE CONF
There is a unique solution for every right hand side.
So in homogeneous system the unique solution has to be
NOTE CONF
zero.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um something to do with the growth or the columns.
So if the matrix is invertible, the rows or the
NOTE CONF
columns are linearly independent and each set of them spans
the whole of RN.
NOTE CONF
And the first thing we had actually was that you
can reduce the matrix to the identity by elementary row
NOTE CONF
operations.
So this is all um, or the same as um.
NOTE CONF
Um, as um.
The matrix being invertible.
NOTE CONF
So that brings us to determinant.
So um, these are used for, we use them for
NOTE CONF
first of all, determining whether a matrix is invertible, that
how we introduce them.
NOTE CONF
Um, but then they had quite a big role to
play in finding eigenvalues, um, through the correct characteristic polynomial.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I also said these can be useful for
determining whether a set of vectors is linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
If you've got n vectors and n dimensions, you can
work out the determinant.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if that is non-zero, these are linearly independent.
Um, there's a few oddities that came up like aggregate
NOTE CONF
or Cramer's rule.
Um, not sure how important they are.
NOTE CONF
They come up sometimes as an oddity, sort of.
They allow you to do some proofs.
NOTE CONF
You suddenly say, oh yeah, yeah, I've got Cramer's root
and then everything.
NOTE CONF
Everything works out.
But I'm not really sure whether there's much practical applications
NOTE CONF
there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, things you should know how to do with
determinants.
NOTE CONF
Obviously calculating them.
So we've got an explicit formula for two by two
NOTE CONF
matrices for higher dimensions.
You typically want to expand by row columns, try to
NOTE CONF
exploit zeros or in some cases actually doing row and
column operations to try to bring the matrix into triangular
NOTE CONF
form.
And then the determinant is just the mould, the, the
NOTE CONF
the product of all the diagonal elements there.
So that might be the best way actually most efficient
NOTE CONF
way here for general matrix rules for working with determinants.
Um, so to some extent this is what you'd expect.
NOTE CONF
Um I want to make you aware, um, first of
all, maybe maybe the bottom one here.
NOTE CONF
So you can take the product determinant of A and
B apart here, um, which also means that within a
NOTE CONF
determinant you can actually swap the order of matrices without
changing the determinant.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
That can be that can be really quite useful in
NOTE CONF
a lot of things.
Remember that.
NOTE CONF
And the other one, if you take a factor k
out of the determinant.
NOTE CONF
Now you might be used.
We've talked about linear transformation a lot of stuff.
NOTE CONF
If you take a factor out it's just the factor
that stays there.
NOTE CONF
That seems to be a natural thing.
And you might think this works everywhere.
NOTE CONF
Um, for determinants this doesn't work.
If you take a factor out, it comes out with
NOTE CONF
s k to the power of n.
Now be aware of that easy mistake, mate.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I said about effect of row column operations
on the determinant.
NOTE CONF
And this is used to determine whether a matrix is
invertible.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we use this to do vector geometry.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we've had quite um, sort of these are
various different lines and lines in our 2 or 3
NOTE CONF
planes in R3 that we could describe by different forms
of a parametric or normal version of these equations.
NOTE CONF
Smell.
So I, I claim that there's really only two that
NOTE CONF
you have to have to work.
Um, no.
NOTE CONF
Um, one the normal form, um, and the other, which
is here called vector form.
NOTE CONF
I tend to think about this as the parametric form.
So in the parametric form of vector form, you have
NOTE CONF
a sort of one point on your line or a
plane.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then some vectors that give you direction which
you can move along this plane.
NOTE CONF
Now, um, the one that I have greyed out there,
the parametric form is at the very bottom is really
NOTE CONF
just the vector form written in components.
There's nothing different going on.
NOTE CONF
It's just it's just different notation.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Going back.
Now the normal form um, again you've got P here
NOTE CONF
which is any point on your line or on the
plane.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then you, um, I just realised this.
You should be the same P obviously.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then you've got a normal vector vector which
is perpendicular to that line in R2 or to the
NOTE CONF
plane and R3.
Or actually, if you want to describe a line in
NOTE CONF
R3 unit two of these vectors here.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you should know these forms.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you should yeah.
You should know all of these units.
NOTE CONF
You should know how to set them up.
You should know how to convert between one or the
NOTE CONF
other using stuff like cross products or so that might
be quite useful.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you should also have a sort of intuitive feel
for them knowing what they really what they really tell
NOTE CONF
you, you know.
So an example that I have here is the following.
NOTE CONF
So if I've got a plane in R3 that goes
through the origin, does that mean that the vector, the
NOTE CONF
p here in the vector form has to be equal
to zero?
NOTE CONF
You know, it just has to be a scalar multiple
direction vector.
NOTE CONF
Doesn't necessarily.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't necessarily have to be zero.
Yeah, the P in all these forms actually is just
NOTE CONF
one point on the plane or on the line.
It could be the origin.
NOTE CONF
And indeed, if I see that the P is zero,
that it must go through the origin, but otherwise it
NOTE CONF
could just be any.
There's plenty of others.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So know that these things, what they stand for and
NOTE CONF
what, what what they actually try to encode them.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um to some extent the vector geometry is a
bit unrelated to the rest of Illus in this application.
NOTE CONF
But it is important in other areas, you know, so
there's quite a bit of sort of physics engineering, machine
NOTE CONF
learning actually uses quite a lot of ideas from vector
geometry.
NOTE CONF
Um, obviously something like computer graphics or so.
Um, you tend to do these things.
NOTE CONF
So things you should know how to do is uh,
like calculating cross product, scalar product, determining angles between lines
NOTE CONF
and planes, determining volume of certain things.
Uh, calculate Projections onto lines, planes being able to calculate
NOTE CONF
the length of a vector or distances.
Now the theory that that leads into is the I
NOTE CONF
have put down here the triangle inequality.
That is something again that comes up everywhere.
NOTE CONF
The triangle inequality in all places where you don't expect
that there have nothing to do with geometry.
NOTE CONF
It's a very, very powerful theoretical tool.
And one thing that I wanted to make you aware
NOTE CONF
here is if I look at those that are highlighted
in red here, um, scalar product determining angles, length of
NOTE CONF
vectors, distances, projections.
And if we're talking about length and the triangle inequality,
NOTE CONF
all of those really rely on and only rely on
the scalar product.
NOTE CONF
You know, if I know a scalar product between two
vectors, I can work out all of these.
NOTE CONF
I don't need to know anything else about what a
length, what the distance is or so.
NOTE CONF
I only need to know what a scalar product is.
Now I can generalise these.
NOTE CONF
So I say all of these depend on the scalar
product.
NOTE CONF
I said we can work in other vector space.
It doesn't have to be the real number.
NOTE CONF
I can for example a function space is a really
odd things.
NOTE CONF
As long as I can determine or define something that
is a scalar product in them, I automatically get all
NOTE CONF
of these, get projections, get length of vectors, get angles,
and something like that that I can define in all
NOTE CONF
of these things.
So I can can define angles between two functions for
NOTE CONF
example, and things like that.
And these tend to be quite useful actually.
NOTE CONF
So be aware of that.
Scalar product is quite important.
NOTE CONF
Stuff like the draw of generalisation is what is called
a Hilbert space.
NOTE CONF
That's a vector space with a scalar product.
And at least those of you who are doing mathematicians
NOTE CONF
will will see them.
Okay, so I'm starting to get a little bit more
NOTE CONF
abstract.
Um, so the next thing is linear transformations.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is quite small.
You've seen this.
NOTE CONF
This is a page from Nicholson again.
Um, so a linear transformation, um, is a transformation of
NOTE CONF
it if it satisfies these two axioms that we had
and we talked about this, that they preserve addition and
NOTE CONF
scalar multiplication.
Now I talked about this in the context here of
NOTE CONF
the determinant which isn't linear.
But typically if I've gotten a and take that out,
NOTE CONF
it just stays less than a um, and I can
break up an addition between two vectors by just adding
NOTE CONF
their, their things.
So the important thing we had about them was this
NOTE CONF
theorem here, um, which says the main thing here is
if I've got a linear transformation or a linear transformation
NOTE CONF
is linear if and only if it is a matrix
transformation.
NOTE CONF
So matrices and linear transformation to some extent are the
same thing.
NOTE CONF
So I said at the beginning, we can think about
one question that this course addresses is what are actually
NOTE CONF
matrices?
And so this is one answer.
NOTE CONF
A matrix is a linear transformation or can describe a
linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
Right okay.
The other thing is that is quite useful is that
NOTE CONF
this theorem tell you if I know the effect of
a linear transformation on some vectors, I can actually write
NOTE CONF
on the matrix.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And indeed I think I have that right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'll come back to that.
So some trivial examples of linear transformations where like the
NOTE CONF
identity if I don't don't do anything that's a linear
transformation.
NOTE CONF
If I met everything to the zero vector, that's the
linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
Um, note that that only works for the zero vector.
Um, if I map everything to another fixed vector that
NOTE CONF
isn't zero, that isn't linear.
You know, we did say one easy way of recognising
NOTE CONF
them is a linear transformation.
Must map 0 to 0.
NOTE CONF
Anything that doesn't do that can it cannot be linear.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Scalar multiplication.
NOTE CONF
Um, so also if I'm scaling so say everything, I
double every vector.
NOTE CONF
That's a linear transformation.
I can have different scales in different directions.
NOTE CONF
I can double the x component and multiply the y
component by three.
NOTE CONF
Um that will also give me a linear transformation.
Um so these works.
NOTE CONF
Translation is not a linear transformation doesn't map 0 to
0.
NOTE CONF
So just moving everything to the side isn't linear.
Uh, projections are linear.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have this weird property there that, um, a
transformation is defined to be a projection.
NOTE CONF
If I apply twice, it's the same as applying it
once.
NOTE CONF
Um, which is a funny sort of.
You can think about it and think that this is
NOTE CONF
true.
But it's again, a sort of funny thing about defining
NOTE CONF
things by their properties rather than telling you directly what
they are.
NOTE CONF
Um, rotations are linear transformations.
Now that's a that's a big example.
NOTE CONF
Um, I haven't put on, but, uh, like mirroring reflections
or also linear transformations.
NOTE CONF
Be aware of this.
Uh, now I've got a rotation there and I say
NOTE CONF
rotation by theta degrees.
Um, so the obvious question if I say that is
NOTE CONF
this clockwise or anti-clockwise?
You say anti-clockwise.
NOTE CONF
It's a relatively safe answer.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Typically, typically, if I don't say anything in mathematics, I
always assume it's going to be anticlockwise.
NOTE CONF
Um, I might have tried to confuse you, but this
is actually anticlockwise.
NOTE CONF
This is the matrix for anticlockwise.
How would I check that?
NOTE CONF
So I said here the second part of this theorem,
that all I need to know is what the matrix
NOTE CONF
or what the transformation does on the basis vectors.
Um, so it's fully specified by the image of the
NOTE CONF
basis vectors actually with respect to any basis.
Uh, we've done this here with respect to the standard
NOTE CONF
basis, but you could do this with any basis.
It would still work.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So, um, so we have the following there that we
NOTE CONF
say if we've got a transformation that maps the first
basis vector to AC and the second one for to
NOTE CONF
BD, well then it must have a C and BD
as its columns, which you can quickly sort of satisfy.
NOTE CONF
If I multiply this out one zero times that makes
it gives me AC01 times that makes this gives me
NOTE CONF
bd.
So that must be the matrix here.
NOTE CONF
So I can now go and apply that to the
rotation and think well what does the rotation do if
NOTE CONF
I have the first unit vector there.
So this one here, um on rotate that by theta
NOTE CONF
degrees anti-clockwise.
That will give me this green one there.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then I need to do a little bit
of trigonometry and realise that those components are actually the
NOTE CONF
cos and the sine.
So that's got to be the first column of my
NOTE CONF
matrix.
And I can do the same with the other unit
NOTE CONF
vector.
And that gives me the other one.
NOTE CONF
So if you want to know something about a matrix
what transformation is it.
NOTE CONF
If you've got a transformation want to know what matrix
is it?
NOTE CONF
First thing probably is just look at the unit vectors.
That typically tells you everything you need to know about
NOTE CONF
what's going on here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, things you should be able to do, um,
determine if I give you a transformation or describe a
NOTE CONF
transformation, should be able to tell me whether this is
linear or not.
NOTE CONF
Um, similarly, it should be able to find the matrix.
Um, just showed you how to do that.
NOTE CONF
You said to some extent be able to go the
other way around.
NOTE CONF
Describe the transformation defined by a given matrix.
Now, we haven't done that completely.
NOTE CONF
Um, like complete that I have given you a set
of rules.
NOTE CONF
It's come up in different ways.
So I'll just say this here.
NOTE CONF
I say a little bit more later when I talk
about eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
Um, we've talked a bit about concatenation of two matrix
transformations again.
NOTE CONF
If in doubt, have a look at what happens to
the unit vectors.
NOTE CONF
Um that usually will get you there.
Um theorems or theory.
NOTE CONF
Um, the definition obviously of linearity being able to apply
them.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that means if I do know this image
x and y of x and y, I actually know
NOTE CONF
the image of x plus y.
Um, that might be hidden in some way or so,
NOTE CONF
but, um, that's a useful thing to know.
Um, it's completely defined by its action on the basis
NOTE CONF
vector set that a few times.
Another thing, because linear transformation are the same as matrixes,
NOTE CONF
they allow you to determine whether a matrix is invertible
by thinking, whether the linear transformation that it describes can
NOTE CONF
be undone.
You know, a rotation.
NOTE CONF
If I rotate, I can rotate back.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
No problem.
If I mirror a reflection of a if I reflect,
NOTE CONF
I can reflect back again.
No problem on doing that a projection.
NOTE CONF
If I project, I can't undo it.
At least I don't know exactly where I've come from.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, so the projection cannot be invertible.
Again, this is a nice test to see whether stuff
NOTE CONF
is invertible or not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So after that we've sort of gone really to the
sort of more abstract part of things, um, subspaces basis,
NOTE CONF
linear independence, rank nullity, all these things.
So we've done a few things about subspaces.
NOTE CONF
Um, so again, we sort of have axioms of what
a subspace is.
NOTE CONF
And we sort of set hand-waving.
Um, so this looks similar to linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
A subspace is something that we can define a linear
transformation on.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what are subspaces, um, in R3 lines and
planes through the origin of subspaces.
NOTE CONF
Or they're sort of a generalisation.
If you go to a higher dimensions, uh, lines and
NOTE CONF
planes that not don't go through the origin or not
subspaces, then a subspace must include the zero vector.
NOTE CONF
And indeed that was one of the axioms of a
subspace.
NOTE CONF
Um, we've had a lot of different things that are
subspaces null space, column space, row space a set of
NOTE CONF
eigenvectors to a particular to a particular eigenvalue is also
a subspace.
NOTE CONF
Um, so be aware of that.
Um, the span of vectors is a subspace.
NOTE CONF
Indeed.
That's how we sort of motivated, um, the span.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so I should talk about the span.
Um, again, we've had this definition of span is the
NOTE CONF
set of all linear combination of these particular vectors.
Um, and we we talked about whether sort of there's
NOTE CONF
a superfluous vectors in the spanning set.
Um, and we've seen that this isn't the case.
NOTE CONF
None of the vectors are superfluous.
None of the vectors we can delete if these vectors
NOTE CONF
are linearly independent.
And there's a weird definition there that spent some time
NOTE CONF
on saying this is really the same as saying that
none of these vectors can be written as a linear
NOTE CONF
combination of the others.
Again, be aware of being able to play with these
NOTE CONF
two properties, and if you do have a set of
vectors that both span and are linearly independent, this is
NOTE CONF
what we call a basis with all the properties that
we just talked about in for a basis for linear
NOTE CONF
transformations.
Nope.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what should you do?
What should you be able to do?
NOTE CONF
Um.
Determine if vectors are linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I give you some, um, determining a vector
is a linear combination of some others.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I give you a set of vectors, does
this span a subspace?
NOTE CONF
Is this the basis of the subspace being able to
find, um, a basis for a given subspace?
NOTE CONF
Um, and, uh, I thought I said there, well, I
come I'm sure come back to that.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, so theory you should be aware of, I
did say about, um, sort of the linear dependence really
NOTE CONF
just means no vectors, a linear combination of the others,
um, basis spans and is linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
Uh, different basis if I can't have a basis isn't
unique, I kind of different basis for a subspace from
NOTE CONF
an R2.
I can have just a standard basis, or I can
NOTE CONF
have any set of three linearly independent vectors, but all
bases must have the same number of elements, and that
NOTE CONF
is what we call the dimension.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, good.
So then we had a, um, sort of interesting thing
NOTE CONF
about this sort of concept of rank and dimension.
So there are two very useful theorems there.
NOTE CONF
Um, the one of them is the what is called
the rank theorem.
NOTE CONF
Um, this first of all, tells you that the dimension
of the column space of the matrix is the same
NOTE CONF
as the dimension of the row space.
Um, which might be surprising, but it's similar to, um,
NOTE CONF
determinant being the same, and that if a matrix is
invertible, both rows and column vectors have to be linearly
NOTE CONF
independent.
Um, but um, so the dimension of the row and
NOTE CONF
the column space is the rank.
And it actually concretely tells you in the second part,
NOTE CONF
how do I find a basis of the column space
of the matrix or a row space of the matrix.
NOTE CONF
So that is a sort of standard question that might
come up.
NOTE CONF
This theorem the second part tells you what to do.
So it's a useful thing to remember.
NOTE CONF
Um, the other thing is what is called the rank
nullity theorem.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this one is again one of those we're
thinking you need to sort of read this carefully three
NOTE CONF
times before you know what it tells you.
Um, but what it tells is the following, um, that
NOTE CONF
the rank of a matrix plus the dimension of its
null space has to equal the dimension that you're in.
NOTE CONF
So in other words, if a matrix is rank deficient,
if you're missing dimensions from the rank of a matrix,
NOTE CONF
these and exactly those have to appear in the null
space.
NOTE CONF
So I see again a useful thing to to calculate
um with some of those.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So finally things you should know.
There um should be able to determine the rank of
NOTE CONF
the matrix by sort of any of the of the
methods.
NOTE CONF
Gaussian elimination.
Bring it in row echelon form.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you know something about the null space.
You can use the rank nullity theorem.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you know how many vectors are linearly dependent or
not linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Determine the dimensions.
NOTE CONF
Find basis for row space, column space, and null space.
Last theorem that we had.
NOTE CONF
Um, every base has the same number of elements.
I said the dimensions are the same.
NOTE CONF
The nullity theorem is surprisingly useful in a lot of
things.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that brings us to the sort of last
major topic which is eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
Now, I was a bit surprised.
This is a little bit hidden in Nicholson.
NOTE CONF
Um, actually it doesn't have a chapter called eigenvalues.
Eigenvectors is somewhere hidden into a diagonalization.
NOTE CONF
So I would claim that eigenvectors eigenvalues if there's another
thing apart from God's elimination, you want to remember from
NOTE CONF
this course, this is it.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This really is very important everywhere in sciences.
So, um, what is this used for within the Ila?
NOTE CONF
We use this to talk about diagonalization of matrices.
And we've got a little bit of insight into the
NOTE CONF
geometric transformations described by a matrix.
I set this earlier.
NOTE CONF
So if I know the eigenvalues and eigenvectors I can
tell you something about what this is what this thing
NOTE CONF
does know.
So if I have a reflection by necessity I need
NOTE CONF
to have a minus minus one as an eigenvector eigenvalue.
Because there is what there are some vectors which are
NOTE CONF
mapped to it's, they're negative.
And I also have to have an eigenvalue that is
NOTE CONF
one, because anything in the line or the plane of
the projection of the transformation is not going to be
NOTE CONF
mapped at all.
It's just going to be mapped to itself.
NOTE CONF
So if I've got eigenvalues of one and minus one,
there is a reflection in there.
NOTE CONF
If I've got an eigenvalue of zero there's some sort
of projection going on.
NOTE CONF
A projection maps something to zero, which wasn't zero beforehand.
And that's always the case.
NOTE CONF
Eigenvalue of zero is parametrically.
There's a projection going on if I haven't got a
NOTE CONF
full set of eigenvalues, if I'm missing some because the
characteristic characteristic polynomial doesn't factorise completely.
NOTE CONF
I have a, I have a rotation as part of
the whole thing.
NOTE CONF
So a rotation matrix doesn't factorise completely, and indeed that's
always the case.
NOTE CONF
So I will have as part of the whole thing
I have a rotation.
NOTE CONF
So you can give me some, you can get some
information about what is going on geometrically.
NOTE CONF
As I said, we haven't done this completely, but just
sort of keep in mind that these things are related.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So where does this lead to outside of Ila?
And I would claim pretty much all areas of sciences
NOTE CONF
Use eigenvectors, eigenvalues, and not just sciences or the medicine,
humanities or all of these.
NOTE CONF
The reason the main thing is really analysis of dynamical
systems.
NOTE CONF
So a dynamical system is something that evolves over time.
We sort of you in every time step it basically
NOTE CONF
the same thing happens to that again.
So something like disease dynamics population dynamics.
NOTE CONF
You can say I've got certain number of infected people
one time step later, there's a rule that tells me
NOTE CONF
what happens after that.
Population dynamics the same predator prey models.
NOTE CONF
If you've seen that you know this is a dynamical
system.
NOTE CONF
Also quite a bit of stuff.
And mechanical engineering or power systems engineering, um, can be
NOTE CONF
described by dynamical systems and eigenvalues tell you whether such
a system, what the long term behaviour is, it's the
NOTE CONF
stable will any perturbations to the system die down or
will they blow up.
NOTE CONF
You know, So there's a that's a famous example.
This is the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in the US, which
NOTE CONF
I think in the 60s collapsed with the wind coming
through.
NOTE CONF
And the reason is nobody has done the eigenvalue analysis.
There were some perturbations, namely wind speed coming through at
NOTE CONF
a certain direction where the perturbation didn't die down.
Indeed, um, got bigger and bigger.
NOTE CONF
So the bridge collapsed.
But in order to to for this not to happen,
NOTE CONF
you can work out eigenvalues of the system and see
what happens there.
NOTE CONF
I give you give you an example in a second,
uh, things you should know how to do.
NOTE CONF
Um, calculate eigenvalues of a matrix, obviously including their multiplicity.
Calculate corresponding eigenvectors and the space the, the basis of
NOTE CONF
the eigenspace.
Um, and I said a little bit about the concept
NOTE CONF
between eigenvalues, what they actually mean to the geometry of
a certain transformation.
NOTE CONF
You know, um, there's a bit of theory that I've
got in italics there, because if not really done any
NOTE CONF
of that properly, it's all in Nicholson.
And we've mentioned a few things.
NOTE CONF
Cayley Hamilton came up as a discussion task.
There's something about complex numbers, of course, everything factorises and
NOTE CONF
you always have n eigenvalues.
Um, I did say that if you're missing some in
NOTE CONF
real numbers, there's a rotation there.
We haven't really done that.
NOTE CONF
It's just stuff to be aware of.
Um, where this is where this is leading.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, then we talked about diagonalization and similarity.
NOTE CONF
So matrix A is Diagonalisable.
If there is a vertical matrix P minus p such
NOTE CONF
that I p minus one a times p is a
diagonal matrix.
NOTE CONF
Now or if I half that I can turn it
the whole way round and say I can decompose my
NOTE CONF
matrix into a diagonal matrix and sort of some, some
mapping there that doesn't undoes a transformation.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I have something like that.
Very nice.
NOTE CONF
The element of D.
Here are the eigenvalues of my matrix and the columns
NOTE CONF
of the p.
Here are the corresponding eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
So that's a nice thing.
Now not every matrix is diagonalisable unfortunately.
NOTE CONF
So you should know the theory behind it when I
can tell that.
NOTE CONF
So the real criterion is that all eigenspace for every
eigenvalue I can work out the eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
That gives me an eigenspace.
You know the set of all the eigenvectors to their
NOTE CONF
eigenvalue.
And I can work out the dimension of that.
NOTE CONF
So for all eigenvectors the eigenspace must have the same
dimension as the multiplicity of this eigenvalue in the characteristic
NOTE CONF
polynomial.
So that's the criterion for Diagonalisable ability.
NOTE CONF
It's a bit of a handful.
There's a lot of lot of stuff to check.
NOTE CONF
Now there's a few sort of shortcuts.
One of them is if my matrix has got n
NOTE CONF
distinct eigenvalues, every eigenvalues must have one eigenvector.
So there must be at least of dimension one.
NOTE CONF
Because I've got n of them, I've got n different
ones.
NOTE CONF
And the first criterion works.
The other nice nice one is symmetric matrices.
NOTE CONF
They always diagonalise.
So that's also a nice one right.
NOTE CONF
You should be able to find a diagonalization.
And there was something about the sort of near diagonalization
NOTE CONF
where if you've got missing eigenvectors for some of these
eigenspaces you have some full columns in the matrix V.
NOTE CONF
So that's something we have to do.
Um, so theory that you should be aware of we
NOTE CONF
have had conditions, we had these conditions here for Diagonalise
ability.
NOTE CONF
And we had a definition of similarity.
But I'm not going to say more about that.
NOTE CONF
Apart from that it is there.
What I do want to say something about is this
NOTE CONF
one here.
Uh, so this is very useful.
NOTE CONF
So we had I said we had that.
If it's diagonalisable, I can write p minus one, a
NOTE CONF
p equals to D, or I can turn this the
other way around.
NOTE CONF
Now this is very useful, um, to say if I
now want to have the matrix A to some power
NOTE CONF
A to the power k.
Now if I, if I keep writing this, I've got
NOTE CONF
a lot of p minus p in the middle that
all cancel out.
NOTE CONF
And I'm left with p times d to the k
times p.
NOTE CONF
Now d to the k is very easy to determine
what that is now.
NOTE CONF
And this now is the link to all the stuff
I said earlier about dynamical systems and the analysis of
NOTE CONF
them, because I can now tell you whether something like
A to the K, whether this some components of that
NOTE CONF
go to zero or it blows up.
Now if the corresponding eigenvalues is less than one in
NOTE CONF
modulus, take it to a higher and higher power will
that this will finally go to zero.
NOTE CONF
If it's greater than one in modulus.
It will blow up.
NOTE CONF
If it's one in modulus, it does something else.
It flips around or it rotates or something like that.
NOTE CONF
So that's the long term behaviour.
Now if I go back to all these examples of
NOTE CONF
dynamical systems, what they all have in common is that
I've got a state of the system, I've got a
NOTE CONF
vector describing what the system is in and the effect
how the system evolves from one time period to the
NOTE CONF
next can be described by the effect of a matrix
by a matrix transformation, or at least approximated.
NOTE CONF
So if I now want to know what happens in
a hundred timesteps from now, I just need to keep
NOTE CONF
applying this matrix over and over again.
And to know what happens if I if I keep
NOTE CONF
applying the matrix over and over again.
If I know the eigenvalues, I can tell you exactly
NOTE CONF
what happened.
Well, so that's the where the sort of analysis of
NOTE CONF
dynamical system comes from and why eigenvalues are important.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So final thing.
Um orthogonality.
NOTE CONF
So we've talked about bases.
Not all bases have to be orthogonal.
NOTE CONF
The standard basis in N tends to be it's orthogonal.
But there's other things.
NOTE CONF
They don't have to be orthogonal.
However if you have an orthogonal basis this can be
NOTE CONF
very useful you know.
So we have these Fourier coefficients.
NOTE CONF
Um for example, if I, if I give you a
matrix any matrix in R3 and I'll give you another
NOTE CONF
vector, and I want you to express this vector as
a linear combination of those basis vectors.
NOTE CONF
Now I know that that's possible because they're a matrix.
Um, but if they're not orthogonal, I would have to
NOTE CONF
solve a linear system of equations.
No, that's really the only way.
NOTE CONF
Unless there's something trivially.
And I just see what it is.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
But usually you would have to solve a linear system
NOTE CONF
of equations if they are orthogonal.
Um, there was this sort of Fourier theorem that says
NOTE CONF
I can calculate the coefficients directly by just doing projections.
Now I can get them very quickly.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if they're even orthonormal, I just need to
do a dot product.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So um, so this is this can be quite useful
NOTE CONF
though.
Um, eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
So same thing.
Not all sets of eigenvectors have to be orthogonal.
NOTE CONF
But again if they are um this can be very
useful.
NOTE CONF
Now one important case, and indeed the only case where
you have a set of orthogonal eigenvectors or basis of
NOTE CONF
orthogonal eigenvectors is if the matrix is symmetric, and this
is an if and only if symmetric matrices do diagonalise
NOTE CONF
and the eigenvectors can be orthogonal.
Can choose the eigenvectors to be orthogonal um and vice
NOTE CONF
versa.
Um, now there's a nice application to that.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so before I do that, things you should be
able to do is find an orthogonal, orthonormal basis.
NOTE CONF
This is the Gram-Schmidt process.
If I've got a basis and I want to make
NOTE CONF
it into an orthogonal or orthonormal basis.
Um, and also finding this applying this Fourier theorem, applying
NOTE CONF
finding coefficients with respect to a basis.
Um the theory should be where is this principle axis
NOTE CONF
theorem.
So that one was this one that I just had
NOTE CONF
there that it says a symmetric matrix has an orthonormal
basis of eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
Now, um, that actually has quite a lot of applications
in the sciences.
NOTE CONF
And I want to just show you one.
Um, and this is what it's called the tennis racket
NOTE CONF
theorem.
Now, those of you who do physics will no doubt
NOTE CONF
see this again.
It's just too nice a thing to do, but I
NOTE CONF
decide to do that here.
So I brought a tennis racquet.
NOTE CONF
Um, and the idea is the following.
I can try to rotate this tennis racket so I
NOTE CONF
can rotate it, for example, like that, you know, but
I can rotate it in different ways as well.
NOTE CONF
I can, for example, rotate it like that.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that all works.
Well, it's a bit, but it works.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I can try to rotate it like this.
NOTE CONF
And see what happens.
It won't just rotate in that direction.
NOTE CONF
It'll flip at the same time as a rotated.
It will do a flip.
NOTE CONF
And indeed, it is practically impossible trying to rotate this
in this direction without doing a flip.
NOTE CONF
It will just do that.
Now, why is that the case?
NOTE CONF
And this is not just a tennis racket.
This is indeed any three dimensional object that you can
NOTE CONF
rotate now physically, What's going on?
If I want to move something like that, what I
NOTE CONF
need to know is it's mass.
It's sort of resistance to being moved.
NOTE CONF
If I want to rotate something, I need to know
something.
NOTE CONF
That's called the inertia.
It's resistance to being rotated.
NOTE CONF
If I try to do this in three dimensions.
So I actually get a matrix of inertia, a three
NOTE CONF
by three matrix of inertia that I can write down
or calculate.
NOTE CONF
Now this matrix of inertia is symmetric.
Now symmetric matrix means I've got an orthogonal basis of
NOTE CONF
eigenvectors.
Now the eigenvectors are indeed the three possible rotation axis
NOTE CONF
that I've just showed you.
Those are the eigenvectors of this, um, of this this,
NOTE CONF
uh, tennis racket here.
And there have to be orthogonal to each other.
NOTE CONF
Now, why is one or why are two of these
things stable and the other one not.
NOTE CONF
It's again a dynamical system.
It's again a stability analysis here.
NOTE CONF
If I want to rotate it like that I'm not
perfect.
NOTE CONF
I can't just rotate in this direction by either me
not being perfect or by air resistance or something.
NOTE CONF
It'll also get rotation components in the other two rotation
axis.
NOTE CONF
So and now I can look at what is happening
to this motion that I put to it now.
NOTE CONF
So there are some dimensions, some rotation acts in which
this is symmetric like any perturbation will die down by
NOTE CONF
what the eigenvalues tell me.
And there's some axis or some rotation components which will
NOTE CONF
blow up.
Well.
NOTE CONF
So if I do this here or this here or
the others, the rotation axis in which I'm doing will
NOTE CONF
keep there, or the errors that I put in will
die down, and the eigenvalues will tell me that if
NOTE CONF
I do it like that, the arrows won't die down.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So the rotation, the arrow that I put in there
by air resistance or something else will blow up.
NOTE CONF
It isn't stable in that direction.
And as I say, that holds for any that holds
NOTE CONF
for any object that I'm trying to rotate.
It's a little bit more complex.
NOTE CONF
It's not just as simple.
You have to go.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I think that's the Wikipedia page.
You can read it through.
NOTE CONF
It's not just looking at whether eigenvalues are less than
one or larger than one.
NOTE CONF
You need to look at the difference of eigenvalues and
their sign.
NOTE CONF
And the sort of two stable rotations comes out of
that.
NOTE CONF
But that's the sort of typical applications of y eigenvectors.
And this principal axis theorem are important.
NOTE CONF
And where they used.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um that's the end of what I have with that
NOTE CONF
thing here.
So I hope that you found some of that useful.
NOTE CONF
I know it's been a bit of a sort of
2 to 4, but use it as a, as a,
NOTE CONF
as I say, reference to what are the important concept
of Ila.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It's been a pleasure to teach you.
NOTE CONF
Um, all the best for your future studies.
And hopefully you enjoy tomorrow's session.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.